problems are conflicts between ideas
david deutsch the beginning of infinity
page 190
all problems are parochial
what does this mean
it means there is no universal problem
there is no problem that has existed and
will exist for all time for everyone and
everything
can there be problems that exist for all
of humanity also no the people in the
past are now in an unproblematic state
that is
death
problems are problems for a time for a
person or for many people sometimes all
of us
but what is this thing about problems
being conflicts between ideas surely a
problem is out there in the world
no it is always in our mind at the level
of our ideas so for example you may
think that as you look out over the
beautiful yet distressing view from your
home at the rising water from a river
through the torrential rain is a problem
out there but no it's a problem for you
it's not a problem for the river nor
indeed the house you are in for the
house is uncaring and unthinking the
only one to care for the house is you
should the house be flooded that too is
your problem the problem of a rising
river possibly flooding your home is
only a problem because apparently you
lack a solution imagine a distant future
where you are even more wealthy then
just so wealthy that you can afford a
lovely house by the river imagine a
world where you have a great high wall
that at the press of a button rises to
20 meters in height circling your home
like some great modern yet medieval
castle defense impenetrable even to the
flood waters
suddenly rising rivers are no problem
for you you have no conflict of ideas
you merely press the button on your
remote control that says raise and the
walls raise with no more fuss than a
garage door might all problems are like
this
even problems of the so-called
extinction level event types or
existential threat times it is when we
do not have a solution that is the
problem or when we have competing
purported solutions in which case that
is a problem about how best to decide
and move forward
but are there really existential threats
civilization ending possibilities
yes
and in all cases the solutions are
unknown
and thus require more knowledge to solve
but knowledge does not come cheap it
needs to be funded you may be an artist
and your problem is how to create better
art you want to learn
but paint and canvas are not free you
need more wealth and should you gain
more to improve your heart perhaps you
can then sell your higher quality art
and earn more wealth and so the cycle
continues
but i digress
what about the truly global even cosmic
problems
existential angst
we must expect any number of global
civilization ending catastrophes could
befall us we know when none of them
exactly will strike except that in
theory some should eventually occur
but for fun genuinely many people find
it exhilarating to consider all the ways
humanity might be destroyed this is why
disaster movies tend to do so well at
the box office
here are some science fiction type
examples that are nonetheless not
prohibited by any law of physics and
which could occur
number one
asteroid impact
a genuine classic of the genre it is
well known asteroids routinely on
cosmological or even just geological
time scales strike the earth
five times in the history of life on
this planet it has been near
extinguished or rather some large
proportion of species has been
extinguished at least some of these were
caused by asteroids indeed no life at
all was possible on earth early on
because of the so-called late heavy
bombardment which perfectly sterilized
the surface of the planet with molten
rock
but the most famous impact is of course
the so-called kt event the asteroid that
wiped out the dinosaurs and indeed 75
percent of all species we should expect
asteroids from either within our own
solar system or beyond to one day cross
the orbit of the earth at the wrong time
and if it is not deflected would indeed
kill everyone as the atmosphere is
obliterated for centuries two
a nearby supernova
there are no candidates at the moment
that might exterminate life on earth but
eventually one must go off in our
neighborhood and of course this is said
on the basis of our best astrophysics of
there could well be stellar processes we
are unaware of that could cause some
kind of explosion unforeseen
who knows if sirius just 8.6 light years
distant might suddenly go bang
it shouldn't according to all we know
but what do we know
three
the sun for that matter small changes in
the output of the sun could have
catastrophic consequences for earth
four
stellar collisions
most stars are unlike the sun in that
they are far closer to other stars in
pairs or trios or clusters stars can and
do collide the basis of the detection of
gravity waves has simply been the most
extreme cases of dead stars black holes
and neutron stars colliding
if that happened nearby in our galaxy
the resulting radiation from the
explosion could easily blow the
atmosphere of the earth away five
a virus with an r naught of 35 and a
fatality rate of 95 percent
we are all too familiar now with what
far lower numbers would mean for the
world
six
a herbicidal plague that destroys the
overwhelming majority of crops and other
plants
seven
super volcanoes
eight
earthquakes and tsunamis far larger than
any in the last five thousand years
these are all possible
but these are known
none of these keep me awake at night but
what i do sometimes entertain myself
with as i fall off to sleep is those
problems not yet known and not even
imagined that could destroy all of us
so let us entertain some wild fantasies
mindless von neumann probes that eat
planets
alien nanotechnology
dark matter black holes
whatever is more frightening and exotic
than prions much less viruses
a super toxic chemical that somehow gets
into the rain
a neurotoxin produced by plants that
causes people to die suddenly
for that one see the movie the happening
by m knight shyamalan there are so many
problems known in an infinite number
unknown that we need a diversity of
approaches many minds to work upon them
and find solutions fast and for that we
need wealth far more wealth so we must
foster the conditions under which
knowledge grows and wealth grows too in
lockstep
happily how best to foster these
conditions is indeed known but it is not
well known why it is not well known is a
mixture of various ideologies various
anti-rational memes ideas that disable
the critical faculties and do not allow
criticism of the bad idea
the solution is clear about how to
maximize wealth and thus accelerate the
creation of knowledge and prepare
solutions not only for problems known
but also to best prepare the world for
problems yet to be encountered
what is this solution to understand we
must first turn to history and look at
extinction level problems we once had
but solved and how we solved them what
kind of problem was so great that it
seemed that no single person could solve
it and only a coordinated central effort
could bring about a resolution
there are many but here is one surely
prime among them
how to
feed the world
the anti-rational solution
the problem of how to feed people
reliably and cure starvation
used to be a terrible problem and in a
sense still remains a real problem just
threatening once again to rear its head
at any time
one solution popular in many places for
a time and in fact still popular despite
being roundly refuted over and over
again was not to allow liberty in the
form of the free market or rather a more
free market it was instead to centrally
plan and then coerce a solution onto the
populace
intellectuals with the best ideas those
in government and with power would
allocate land and then direct farmers
what to grow
this would be efficient and avoid waste
what was grown could then be
redistributed so that no one got too
much or too little
this method was the method in ancient
tribes medieval times and of course
communist china for decades it remains
largely the method in north korea and
some other rare places today
what went wrong
putting aside examples deeper in history
and looking squarely at china between
1959 and 1961 some 45 million people
starved to death there
was a drought pestilence plague
no
it was poor policy it was force and
coercion it was not allowing individuals
to solve this massive problem themselves
at the local level via the means of
trading amongst themselves or with
anyone else they liked the problem was
huge after all
so many agreed with the logic
how could a nation possibly feed
hundreds of millions of people
by leaving it to the people to solve
to leave that to the individual surely
meant chaos disorder in a violent form
of anarchy the free market could not
possibly solve a problem like that it
was far too important to be left to the
masses
central planning and experts were needed
it was simple the government would tell
you what to grow where and when when the
time came for harvest that good
government would come along and take
away your crops or cattle and in return
though you specialized in wheat or beef
you could go to the local distributor
and there you would be given a bounty of
rations of all kinds distributed from a
central place gathered from across the
nation what could possibly go wrong
almost everything
firstly what motivates farmers to try
harder and innovate no innovation is
permitted if you are told grow rice then
you grow rice and if you are told to
grow 100 pounds of rice then 100 pounds
is what you shall grow no more
why try to grow more you are not
permitted to sell anymore and there is
no reward for more you do the minimum
you do not expand you are not rewarded
for harder labor and if the worst does
happen the rain does not come you cannot
diversify the experts have deemed this
is not permitted the market is not free
you cannot have some wheat and some rice
or some rice in some cattle you must do
as you are told central planners cannot
know what is going on on the ground as
well as the locals the problem of how to
feed the world was not solved by a
central government or some expert coming
up with a global solution it was the
absence of the expert and central
government except to the extent that the
government protected the individual that
was the solution hands off by government
allow the people to do what they thought
best in order to feed themselves and
once allowed to feed themselves
they grew more than needed because they
could sell the surplus the rice grower
could sell their extra rice to the
butcher who could sell their extra beef
to the baker who could sell extra bread
to the carpenter who could build a new
granary for the rice grower and so it
went
and now there was far less deficiency
and far more surplus which perhaps could
be sold beyond the community and
overseas for example and that additional
wealth could now be devoted to hiring
plumbers for sewerage works and cleaners
to keep the streets well tended and
doctors to treat the sick and so the
population increased and the world
became better and this is not just china
but everywhere it is tried everywhere
and for all problems always and without
exception not immediately not without
effort and energy and not
unproblematically but eventually and yet
despite this crystalline refutation of
central planning of the very real
knowledge that the free market solved
this problem the anti-rational solution
has not gone away
the vast majority of the planet still
believes and intellectuals still promote
the notion that the most important
problems should not and cannot be left
to the market
they are too big these problems too
difficult to coordinate hence also
health care should not be left to the
market roads cannot be left to the
market space travel education provision
of medical equipment libraries etc and
so on cannot be left to the market deep
ideas some from religion some passed
down on mother's knee since time
immemorial before the written word tell
us that we must centrally plan because
the authorities know best or at least
better
there must be a leader at the top to
coordinate our response there must be
forced cooperation left alone people
will not help each other but must be
forced to help and if you criticize
these notions you are a bad person you
are selfish or blind to the facts or a
fool or a lunatic libertarian this is
the anti-rational mean plex where though
the general solution is known and the
solution has worked and the opposing
idea tested then refuted it nevertheless
persists it has not died and only
because the solution that is the free
market suffers from the floor of all
solutions it does not lead to an
unproblematic state it is not perfect
but no solution will be the free market
is merely the space within which trials
can be attempted and errors corrected
coercion is the space in which we can
pretend we can avoid errors or everyone
can be subject to the same error because
one person has the best way forward into
a future that remains perpetually
unknowable
and rather too many people
who are on the side of free markets have
purity tests for everyone else who is on
their own side certain people aren't
enough for free markets some
objectivists object to the
anarcho-capitalists who object to the
libertarians they'd rather spend time it
seems in the gap that is the narcissism
of small differences between the
libertarians the end caps the classical
liberals the free market conservatives
and so on and so forth then put most of
their effort into fighting the existing
collectivist and socialist threat
i can see a perverse future in which an
iron round objectivist is debating an
anarcho-capitalist in some theater when
actual government-backed fascists bash
in the door shut it all down and take
them away
all the free marketeers no matter what
their stripes are would have far more
allies if they had fewer purity tests
so the socialists and various people who
believe in central planning continue to
believe what they believe
despite
each refutation that is the failure of
central planning as measured by the
immiseration of the population that
groans beneath it with each time the
market is chained and the government
unleashed and a problem exacerbated the
cry goes up well it was lucky the
authorities stepped in in china was the
government ever really blamed for the
starvation of millions
not really unless you are one of those
crazy free marketeers or lunatic
libertarians the socialists and
revisionists blame natural disasters
much of the same can be said for the
north korean famine the so-called
arduous march from 1994 to 1998 when
perhaps more than 2 million people died
of starvation there
natural disaster was blamed
and yet in the south geographically
subject to precisely the same weather
and climate patterns life went on as
normal despite their being affected by
the same weather and climate the
difference between them was not the
presence or absence of the natural
disaster but ideas one country was open
to the world diverse and less centrally
planned the other had and still has a
stance of self-reliance and central
planning and did not think global trade
was good and their farms all centrally
planned
while south korea allowed its farmers to
grow whatever they wished and as much of
it wherever they liked and to sell it
wherever including overseas the north
had the elites make these decisions
people in cities in offices making
decisions affecting what a farmer in a
rural part of the country would do with
their very local and expert knowledge of
how best to do it and so the same
tragedy befilled that place as in china
decades earlier the lessons were not
learned
but perhaps food production and
distribution is just an exception to the
most important problem criteria free
markets cannot solve but is there
anything really more important than
feeding people some say space
exploration is so important it is the
thing that will save civilization
eventually and such a large task it
cannot be left to the market neil
degrasse tyson argued famously in some
circles now that only the government can
do space exploration effectively only
the government rather like some argued
only the government can do food
effectively and only the government can
do health care effectively his program
kneeled program penny for nasa was a
campaign about giving just a penny on a
dollar in other words one percent of the
us budget to nasa but why
because he deemed that this was a better
use of his neighbors money than they did
to solve their problems one percent does
not seem like much but if all you have
is a dollar it's a lot put another way
if you are on a low income say five
hundred dollars a week then one percent
of that is five dollars which still does
not seem like much except that if your
budget that week was two hundred dollars
for rent a hundred and fifty dollars for
food fifty dollars for your electricity
water and transport internet phone and
entertainment another fifty dollars then
almost all of your money is gone you've
solved the problems of shelter food and
comfort to some extent but other
problems loom you've tatted clothes and
no savings should something truly
horrific happen you need to fix the
failing lights in your home say or your
mother has a birthday coming up and more
besides suddenly that five dollars means
everything to you but neil thinks you
should donate it to his favorite project
because he knows better as an
intellectual he knows that the future of
spin-offs and the sense of wonder and
how it will benefit civilization will
all ultimately help you eventually he
cares for you don't you know he is wise
and kind you are blinking in your
thinking trust him it will be okay
eventually don't worry your pretty
little head about it now i don't mean to
pick on neil degrasse tyson he's not
alone there are many many scientists and
intellectuals precisely thinking along
these lines this is the tone of the
benevolent philosopher kings
so today we have spacex and virgin
galaxy to name but two private companies
doing as much as nasa is
can anyone doubt in the decades or
centuries to come that private
enterprise won't be sending spacecraft
to other planets
that start-ups in india are not already
doing likewise the government in
australia has set up a nascent space
agency but the model is to act as a hub
for encouraging private enterprise
rather than assuming the government can
do this or is most effective in
attempting to do so
nasa has done wonderful things and
continues to do wonderful things but
nasa is the centrally planned farming of
space exploration it will indeed get
something done but diversification and
private enterprise and rational
self-interest about these things will
always create more wealth and
opportunities than any committee of
planners possibly could in the long run
[Music]
don't slay the goose
assuring the government in order to
solve our most important problems does
not mean large collaborative efforts
cannot still occur or cannot emerge and
be self-sustaining
food production and distribution was
that and remains that no one had to
mandate anyone did anything in
particular with respect to food
people simply cooperated how did the
cooperation work
cooperation happened between those who
worked the plow with those who packed
the grain with those who drove to the
markets and those who baked the bread
and so on who can really argue that the
government could produce and distribute
food better than what happens today with
producers supermarkets fast food chains
and all those little stores everywhere
in every town
or consider mass communication
would it be better if the government
made smartphones and controlled every
aspect of the internet is the internet
helped or hindered by government people
engage sometimes in post-hoc ergo prop
to hoc fallacies when it comes to some
large infrastructure projects they see
the roads and they conclude only the
government could do roads because the
government created these roads and yet
it's easy to observe that the best
maintained roads are the private toll
roads or they say well only the
government could do internet
infrastructure because they have and yet
most private telecommunications
companies are the ones responsible for
vast networks of fibre optic cables and
4g and 5g networks and so on or they say
only the government can do mass public
transport because they run the biggest
mass public transport post hoc ergo
propter hock yet uber has caused prices
to fall and quality to rise and so on
and so on
the argument from incredulity here goes
i've identified a problem and i simply
cannot imagine how the free market could
possibly solve this
well
one's failure of imagination is no
refutation
if you cannot imagine a solution what
makes you think a government central
planner will why not step aside request
the government lower its guns i'll come
back to that in a moment and allow
innovative individuals to come up with
solutions on the ground
the next solution may come from a local
community coming up with new protocols
or a small team or even the proverbial
lone genius working together on a
solution in a lab or in their basement
and the next thing is they can sell it
to an entrepreneur who mass produces it
now just as a note there people
sometimes get upset when i say things
like that
that government should lower its guns
and get out of the way of other people
trying to innovate what do i mean
government should lower its guns do they
literally have guns pointed at people
unfortunately yes they do
government is a gun and as many have
observed over time that's all government
really is government sole function
should be
to protect private property rights it
should be there to step in and stop
violence should violence break out
when reason fails when your neighbor
ceases to talk with you and starts
throwing punches the government is there
to step in and protect you and
arbitrator at the very least be the
source of a justice system so that you
can get arbitration and
proper compensation
government should be there ideally to
extract out the violence from society so
that society is free to find solutions
to the most important problems if
government starts stepping beyond this
it can only do so by raising a gun and
threatening if government says i need
five dollars for nasa this is not a
request
it is a demand
if you say to the tax officer no i will
not give it to you my dog needs medicine
the government shows no favoritism all
are equal before the law the government
will have its five dollars you will go
without food or your electricity will be
shut off but it will have its five
dollars and should you still refuse to
pay it will be at your door eventually
and if you refuse to pay your bill even
then it will drag you away to court and
if you refuse then it will drag your way
to prison and if you refuse then still
by resisting the force that it applies
to you the force will escalate guns will
be drawn and unless you have one
yourself
it will kill you it'll kill you anyway
even if by not allowing you to leave
your house so that you starve to death
this is government as it is the monopoly
on violence ideally government could be
something else it could be just an
entity that protects
rather than protects and provides all
these other services
because to provide those other services
it must be funded and funded exceedingly
well and those funds must be extracted
from somewhere from the people and the
rich alone are insufficient all he must
contribute which means all have less
capacity to transform their lives and
improve their lot as fast as they might
otherwise have so there ends up being
less diversity and less innovation so
many are concerned about the
concentration of wealth in the hands of
the most successful in the hands of
those that innovate the most and produce
the most value such that we all pay them
for enriching our lives
the bezos and gates and musks and jobs
of the world
but they do not see the irony in
demanding the wealth be super super
concentrated
in the coffers of the government
people who argue that this money be
extracted from the wealthiest
billionaires don't see a problem with it
being concentrated in one place in the
hands of government bureaucrats and
politicians
if there has ever been wealth inequality
it is between the wealth of the
government and its citizens
and that wealth was not created but
extracted at the point of a gun
only the free market and innovation
generates wealth
as david deutscher's explained wealth is
not merely a amount of money in a bank
account it is the repertoire of physical
transformations an entity is capable of
causing from page 202 of the beginning
of infinity
this applies to individuals and
communities and to civilizations we need
much more wealth so that when a problem
arises we can transform that problem
into a solution but we cannot predict
the future growth of knowledge and this
means attempting to control who gets the
wealth would be to prophesy who will
best find the solution
as with anything else like feeding the
world
leaving it to the free market or the
individual is the best way that
innovation can occur more wealth fuels
more knowledge growth both individually
and institutionally but to forcibly
extract wealth from individuals and
institutions and concentrate it in a
central place in the hope that a high
concentration of wealth in a central
location must be the best solution to
any given problem it's precisely the
same era as concentrating on the rice at
a central location so that it can be
distributed fairly it must fail because
then there is less motivation for the
production of rice in the first place if
the central planner is the one to
benefit from siphoning off some amount
or simply feeling the power and
privilege that goes along with being in
control for whatever the problem is we
cannot guess what the best solution is
the proverbial asteroid on a collision
course may seem like it requires a
global effort so such the argument goes
we must concentrate wealth into an
institution that builds rockets to
deflect asteroids
we have no other choice so we should
begin taxing people now but how do we
know that someone were they not taxed so
much
would have the time to work on a system
that deflected asteroids without the
need of rockets a super intense pulse
laser system say well not a rocket but a
nuclear explosion-powered bullet or and
this is more likely a solution no one
had ever thought of before how do we
know that only the government can solve
a pandemic or is best placed to solve a
pandemic how do we know how do we know
that when some large number of people
are made aware of a threat and no to
stay indoors
where sensible and necessary to do so
without coercion would not work at home
on a cure on their computers of the
future
can we say that the best solution will
not be a chemical cure produced on a
quantum laptop checking all the ways
viruses might adapt to a particular
treatment until the key was found to
unlock the code that stopped the spread
how can we possibly guess that the
individual is always less innovative and
hence less powerful than the collective
then the government and all its guns
how do we know that extracting so much
money from people now and borrowing from
people in the future as is now happening
that this extracts that solution from 10
years in the future and places it 100
years in the future
that sally the computational virologist
of 2035 might have found the solution
but will not now because she has less
time because she must work a second job
to pay the tax off to pay the loan taken
out in 2021 and how do we know that the
problem of 2035 was not relatively
speaking small on the scale of things
but because of the scale of debt seems
impossibly difficult to overcome now the
government is just one big basket
collecting many eggs none of which it
produced and breaking many during the
collecting process solutions are created
in the minds of individuals there is no
collective mind
people may cooperate if they freely
choose to do so and cross-fertilization
of ideas is a beautiful and necessary
thing
but force and coercion are antagonistic
to reason and imagination
the harmonic oscillations of society are
driven by the creativity of individuals
but damped sometimes critically by the
force of government
government produces almost no solutions
but rather exacerbates many problems by
dampening the individual it is
individual creativity that will solve
the problems of the future and this is
amplified by freedom including the
freedom to trade and the free market
where wealth creation is accelerated and
knowledge is created at rates beyond
which can be predicted this is not mere
hope
it is a fact of our circumstance
demonstrated again and again by the way
civilization has risen from the dirt and
the tribe from out of starvation into
abundance
it is shown over and again by the human
desire to be free and creates unfitted
by the intrusions of authorities
demanding we take on this task rather
than what we are passionate about it is
the cry of the child who wants to learn
to play the electric guitar and not the
classical violin or wants to perfect
their streak on some computer game
rather than be forced to learn algebra
it is the cry that says i know best what
i want to do and i will pursue this with
a passion like no other but increasingly
we are told not that collaboration is
nearly good and no doubt it can be but
that you must cooperate with the
authorities on pain of penalty you must
seed your will to the collective and
your wealth as well you must not use
your reason for you do not know best the
authorities do you are uncaring and
unthinking if you do not think that
handing more of your wealth to the
central planner to solve the most
important problems is a virtue you must
obey
but every person wants to be free to
solve their own problems
to do this they need to be able to
create the conditions under which they
can flourish and survive
this means creating wealth and this is
all people everywhere
the snide looking down at the typical
person as an unthinking unintelligent
cog who is unlike the elite who can and
should decide for them what is best
is an impulse that comes from the tribe
from the chief and the medicine man
you and i may be the thinking
intelligentsia but come on the mechanic
and the hairdresser they cannot be
expected to be creative the man who digs
ditches the cleaner the bus driver be
realistic these people are not like us
they are not thinking grand visions they
are not contemplating philosophy and how
to fix the world's problems
we
need to outgrow this
the problems of the world are their
problems problems are conflicts of ideas
and they are always parochial the chief
and the medicine man are just other
people too and if they know best they
can persuade us
but they should not point guns each and
every time a problem arises and they
cannot see a solution to it
when they fail to see a solution and
thus call for the clamping down further
on freedoms and the extraction of money
from the future to pay us in the present
we need more people to speak up to
respect authority because that is the
safe thing to do
but also to question it to object where
it is still free to do so
more freedom is needed because freedom
is the wellspring of knowledge creation
and that leads to greater wealth and
more wealth is always what is needed to
prepare for an unknown future
of course wealth solves the problems of
today but it is the problems of tomorrow
we must be ready for
the more the free market which is just
plain old pedestrian freedom for people
to do as they please with their time and
money the more they will innovate so
that tomorrow the world is even more
wealthy and thus better able to deal
with the unending stream of problems
because they are unending it is not as
if once we get through one crisis
tomorrow's won't be worse if today it is
our nord is 2.5 and the fatality rate is
0.6 percent who can guarantee that next
week a new strain is not arnold equals
25 and the fatality rate is 60
if some experts are to be believed this
is not only possible but absolutely will
occur
should we survive long enough but is
that two a reason to have government
ready with its guns to extract the
wealth to solve even that problem
eventually what if the asteroid appears
next year or the tsunami or terrorism on
a massive scale
there are many baskets and many eggs
but it is not the government that lays
them
it is creative people who
given more freedom produce eggs at an
ever faster rate and now and again
perhaps even produce a golden one
[Music]
you